

I will attempt to tell you that M. C. Escher's paintings are still largely misunderstood.

That they are a lens—a tool—into troves of knowledge and intelligence.

That they hold a profound message describing and forecasting the fluctuations of societies,
beliefs, sciences, arts and personalities.

At a glance, Escher paintings leave the momentary impression of realisticly odd.
But an impression is a reflex. If one deliberates the glance, a clear explanation unfolds.

Every small piece of the canvas is a realistic image of our familiar, so called Euclidean,
reality. But the whole is a realistic impossibility which is hidden in a hard to
pin-point error in the shadows of light. A whisper of thought might reveal to
you that it is not an error in shadow that is in disguise, but that the lights are many
and hidden behind the unsuspecting observer—your self. 
Your assumption of a singular light source was broken: That is the mistake.

A few centuries of old and modern Mathematics might claim to have explained
what Escher was doing. One can now even automatically generate Escher-like
drawings using notions like hyperbolic spaces, negative curvature, tilings and so on.

But the truth is that Mathematicians—when asked—will admit that this is no accomplishment
other than translating the phenomenon from one language of expression (the visual)
into another (the Mathematical formalization and self-insisted generalization).

The question, however, remains: Why can the viewer be fooled?

Interestingly we just translated Escher's puzzle into language.
And in light of Modern Linguistics and Cognitive Sciences, it should now
be clear what Escher was saying.

Mistakes in all modalities (visual, linguistic, audible, musical, mathematical, 
and so on) of cognition happen in the same way: 
They look, feel, ring and explain with the conviction of belief—to
their respective experts—but a presumed invariant buried in the scene 
will fool every mind that misses the complete.

A decade of recent Science is now in agreement that our higher-level
cognitive circuits (the abstract reasoning and understanding of everything
in relation to eventual conscious decisions of action) process all
input sources (visual, audible, tectile, and so on) on an equal-citizen basis—i.e. using
the same mechanisms (whatever they may be not being known).

Therefore if a puzzling mistake can be invoked by thinking about a
visual stimulus. A similar one should be reproducible in any other
modality—under a suitably chosen stimulation.

To say this plainly:

There is a story with a puzzling end.
There is a philosophy with a paradox.
There is a theory with an open problem.
There is a loop of music that always sounds unfamiliar.
There is a painting that confuses the eye.
There is a movie that absorbs the attention.
There are fairy-tales that mesmerize.
There are meanings in poems that smile.
There is immersive gaming that causes vomiting.
There are religions that defy death but kill.
There are feelings that out-power reality.
There are humans committing suicide.
There are gambles we didn't win.

To make these observations clearer, enter the Yoga Sutras of Patañjali—a sacred
ancient text known as a direct, albeit superficially metaphorical, map of cognitive
mechanisms, behaviors, phenomena and self-improvement thought exercises.

??

twisting being the main physiologically observed function of the brain.


juxt-apposition with natural story-telling instinct 



reezes monkeys and rsis connection?


interpretive story-telling challenge for computers
anthropomorphize
